README.md, before:

# A sensor-driven, digital Theremin

![My Theremin-like instrument with its periphery](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/theremin-periphery-small.jpg)

Out of fun and interest, I built a [Theremin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theremin)-like instrument, being played entirely touchless with both hands. The idea was to use simple distance sensors with a digital output to do the audio synthesis on a computer. This allows for interesting and fun ways to tinker with the instrument, such as "auto-tune", different audio waveforms or multiple tones at the same time. You can watch and listen to a little demo [here](http://dominikschreiber.de/vid/theremin-demo.webm) (.webm video), although I'm not playing very well yet and the theremin sound has already improved since.

_On this page, I am going to explain the usage of the instrument and the framework: how to build, how to install and how to use it. If you are interested in the process of creating the whole thing, visit my [project blog](https://github.com/domschrei/theremin/wiki/Digital-%22theremin%22:-Project-blog) where I explain it in detail._

![Blueprint of the setup](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/blueprint.png)

The hardware part is really easy – I used two Tinkerforge [ultrasonic distance sensors](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricklets/Distance_US.html#distance-us-bricklet) connected to a [master brick](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricks/Master_Brick.html), which directly communicates with the computer via USB. A simple USB triple foot switch turned out to be a great addition in order to trigger specific effects.

I also developed a small framework for my Theremin to work. The application's tasks are

* periodically polling sensor data;
* synthesizing smooth audio waves out of the raw data;
* sending the samples to the SDL audio mixer;
* processing additional inputs (from keyboard or foot switch) for specific effects; and
* displaying the instrument's current state in a simple graphical interface (if desired).

![The application's UI in action](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/ui.jpg)

I used the [SDL2 library](http://libsdl.org) and the default C(++) bindings for the Tinkerforge sensors. There aren't any other dependencies (besides for the build process and for the brick ↔ computer connectivity).

## Construction manual

In the following, I will explain the process of building a "theremin" just like mine.

### Hardware

What you will need:

* **A computer capable of running the application**  
(Any better-than-potato computer with USB input and audio output should do the job of running the application. I can also confirm that a Raspberry Pi 3 (Model B) with default Raspbian (_Pixel_ Environment) runs the application well, although the realtime info display needs to be turned off in order to maintain the default sample rate. Use a GNU/Linux system for better support from my side.)
* **Two [ultrasonic distance bricklets](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricklets/Distance_US.html#distance-us-bricklet) and the [master brick](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricks/Master_Brick.html)** mentioned above  
(also buy the corresponding bricklet ↔ brick connection cables)
* **A triple foot switch**
(like [this one](https://www.amazon.de/dp/B00WS2GZU2/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_TK9GybS27T1YN); there are many providers for this specific piece, and others should work fine, too, as long as they are mappable to the letters "a", "b" and "c" or you are willing to change the keymaps inside `src/user_interface.cpp`) 
* **A mini (not micro) USB cable** to connect the master brick with the computer
* **Cupboard and duct tape** or something similar to improvise a pair of "gloves"  
(to provide a flat surface for the sensors for better results, see below)
* Boxing material at will

### Software

I am developing and executing the program on Linux only, so I will describe the process for Linux systems. 
However, it should not really be a problem to get it running on other platforms, as all used tools and frameworks are cross-platform (with more or less of a hassle).

#### Dependencies

Install `gcc`, `make`, `cmake` and the [SDL2](https://www.libsdl.org/) library (the core library with version >= 2.0.4 and the _ttf_ addition). Beware: SDL2.0.4 is not available yet in some repositories. For example, you have to build it from sources on the Raspberry Pi 3. This takes about half an hour but shouldn't be complicated otherwise:
* download the sources from the homepage ([main library](https://www.libsdl.org/release/SDL2-2.0.5.zip), [ttf addition](https://www.libsdl.org/projects/SDL_ttf/release/SDL2_ttf-2.0.14.zip)) and do the following steps, first for the main library and then for the addition:
    * unzip the archive and cd into the directory 
    * execute the commands `./configure`, `make`, and `sudo make install` (if something fails, look at the error description, you might be missing a dependency)

#### Tinkerforge software
    
The Tinkerforge framework is needed, especially the [C(++) bindings for the Tinkerforge sensors](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Software/API_Bindings_C.html).
In order to fetch and build those:
* You can just execute `bash get_tinkerforge.sh` (hereby, the script assumes that the commands `wget` and `unzip` are available), which downloads and builds the bindings. 
* Alternatively, you can manually download them [here](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Downloads.html#downloads-bindings-examples) and extract them into a `tinkerforge` directory which needs to be at the same level as the `src` directory of the Theremin application. Inside the `tinkerforge/source` directory, execute the command `make` to compile the Tinkerforge bindings.

If you want to install the bindings globally, additionally execute `sudo make install` inside the `tinkerforge/source` directory. If you skip this, you might have to explicitly provide the library path when launching the application (see below).

Also, install the daemon [brickd](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Software/Brickd.html#brickd) which will enable communication between the computer and the brick, and the UI assistant [brickv](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Software/Brickv.html#brickv) to initially fetch the UIDs of your sensors.

#### Sensor setup

Execute
```
sudo brickd --daemon
```
and open `brickv`. You should now be able to connect to your master brick and see the connected two distance sensors. Get their three-figure UIDs (for example, `uvw` and `xyz`) and replace the definitions of `UID_FREQUENCY` and `UID_VOLUME` inside the file `src/config.h` with your UIDs.
```
#define UID_FREQUENCY "uvw" // UID of ultrasonic distance sensor #1
#define UID_VOLUME "xyz" // UID of ultrasonic distance sensor #2
```
(It does not matter which of the sensors is assigned to which constant, as you can just swap them.)

#### Compile and run

You can now compile the Theremin application by executing
```
bash build.sh
```
inside the application's root folder, which should let an executable called `theremin` appear.

Now, with `brickd` still running, you can execute the application (`./theremin`) and play Theremin! (If the program doesn't launch but instead complains about a missing library, start the program with the command `LD_LIBRARY_PATH=tinkerforge/source/:/usr/local/lib/ ./theremin`.) The USB foot switch should be plug-and-play.

## Using and tweaking

To properly play the instrument, the sensors should be fastened and aligned. A 90 degree approach as shown in the blueprint works fine, with the frequency sensor pointing upwards and the volume sensor pointing to the side. Of course, the sensors can be built into a little box just like I have done (I could have taken a much smaller box if it wasn't for the long connection cables I bought).

Playing with pure hands is possible, but I experienced rather heavy noise and inaccuracies. To achieve really clear results, you can cut out two large circles of cupboard and glue some straps for your hands on it. The cupboard will reflect the ultrasonic waves very well.

### Foot switch

The foot switch has the following options:

* Left pedal: The current frequency will be stored and will continue to play until the pedal gets pressed another time. You can move your hand and play two tones at once.
* Central pedal: Until the pedal gets pressed another time, all tones will be played exactly one octave higher. This can be used to extend the pitch range of the instrument.
* Right pedal: Each press switches the waveform which is being used for audio synthesis. I implemented some pretty random waveforms, with varying results.

Internally, the foot switch just puts out the letters "a", "b" and "c" respectively, just like a keyboard. Hence, you can use the keys of your keyboard as well (which, however, is much less convenient than a foot switch).

### Autotune modes

The application supports some types of frequency aligning: `none`, `smooth` and `full`. You can change the type by pressing 1, 2 or 3 respectively, and they have the following effects:

* `none`: The distance value of the sensor gets directly mapped to a frequency (in an exponential manner, such that moving the hand by the same amount on different height levels should yield roughly the same frequency interval).
* `smooth`: Works like `none`, but adds a specific sine wave to the frequency such that the played tone gets "pushed" towards proper halftones, but in-between frequencies are possible nonetheless.
* `full`: Every input frequency (the output of the `none` mode) will be aligned towards the halftone which has the minimal distance to the current frequency. This will make the output tone "jump" in between halftones but always produce properly aligned tones.

### Configuration

If your computer can't handle the program without audibly cracking or if you aren't happy with some of the default settings, you can look into the header file `src/config.h` where many things can be tweaked. To tune performance (and trade against better audio quality and/or lower latency), especially he real-time display can be turned off (`REALTIME_DISPLAY`) or its refresh rate can be decreased (`TASK_FREQUENCY_DISPLAY_REFRESH`). Additionally, the constants `AUDIO_SAMPLE_RATE` as well as the different task frequencies (`TASK_FREQUENCY_*`) can be adjusted, resulting in a better performance as well.

Please note that the program has to be recompiled (`bash build.sh`) so that the config changes take effect.

Commit message:

Adapt README to new form of configuration

README.md, after:

# A sensor-driven, digital Theremin

![My Theremin-like instrument with its periphery](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/theremin-periphery-small.jpg)

Out of fun and interest, I built a [Theremin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theremin)-like instrument, being played entirely touchless with both hands. The idea was to use simple distance sensors with a digital output to do the audio synthesis on a computer. This allows for interesting and fun ways to tinker with the instrument, such as "auto-tune", different audio waveforms or multiple tones at the same time. You can watch and listen to a little demo [here](http://dominikschreiber.de/vid/theremin-demo.webm) (.webm video), although I'm not playing very well yet and the theremin sound has already improved since.

_On this page, I am going to explain the usage of the instrument and the framework: how to build, how to install and how to use it. If you are interested in the process of creating the whole thing, visit my [project blog](https://github.com/domschrei/theremin/wiki/Digital-%22theremin%22:-Project-blog) where I explain it in detail._

![Blueprint of the setup](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/blueprint.png)

The hardware part is really easy – I used two Tinkerforge [ultrasonic distance sensors](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricklets/Distance_US.html#distance-us-bricklet) connected to a [master brick](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricks/Master_Brick.html), which directly communicates with the computer via USB. A simple USB triple foot switch turned out to be a great addition in order to trigger specific effects.

I also developed a small framework for my Theremin to work. The application's tasks are

* periodically polling sensor data;
* synthesizing smooth audio waves out of the raw data;
* sending the samples to the SDL audio mixer;
* processing additional inputs (from keyboard or foot switch) for specific effects; and
* displaying the instrument's current state in a simple graphical interface (if desired).

![The application's UI in action](http://dominikschreiber.de/theremin/ui.jpg)

I used the [SDL2 library](http://libsdl.org), [libconfig](http://www.hyperrealm.com/libconfig/) for configuration management, and the default C(++) bindings for the Tinkerforge sensors. There aren't any other dependencies (besides for the build process and for the brick ↔ computer connectivity).

## Construction manual

In the following, I will explain the process of building a "theremin" just like mine.

### Hardware

What you will need:

* **A computer capable of running the application**  
(Any better-than-potato computer with USB input and audio output should do the job of running the application. I can also confirm that a Raspberry Pi 3 (Model B) with default Raspbian (_Pixel_ Environment) runs the application well, although the realtime info display needs to be turned off in order to maintain the default sample rate. Use a GNU/Linux system for better support from my side.)
* **Two [ultrasonic distance bricklets](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricklets/Distance_US.html#distance-us-bricklet) and the [master brick](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Hardware/Bricks/Master_Brick.html)** mentioned above  
(also buy the corresponding bricklet ↔ brick connection cables)
* **A triple foot switch**
(like [this one](https://www.amazon.de/dp/B00WS2GZU2/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_TK9GybS27T1YN); there are many providers for this specific piece, and others should work fine, too, as long as they are mapped (or mappable) to any printable character) 
* **A mini (not micro) USB cable** to connect the master brick with the computer
* **Cupboard and duct tape** or something similar to improvise a pair of "gloves"  
(to provide a flat surface for the sensors for better results, see below)
* Boxing material at will

### Software

I am developing and executing the program on Linux only, so I will describe the process for Linux systems. 
However, it should not really be a problem to get it running on other platforms, as all used tools and frameworks are cross-platform (with more or less of a hassle).

#### Dependencies

Install `gcc`, `make`, `cmake` and the [SDL2](https://www.libsdl.org/) library (the core library with version >= 2.0.4 and the _ttf_ addition). Beware: SDL2.0.4 is not available yet in some repositories. For example, you have to build it from sources on the Raspberry Pi 3. This takes about half an hour but shouldn't be complicated otherwise:
* download the sources from the homepage ([main library](https://www.libsdl.org/release/SDL2-2.0.5.zip), [ttf addition](https://www.libsdl.org/projects/SDL_ttf/release/SDL2_ttf-2.0.14.zip)) and do the following steps, first for the main library and then for the addition:
    * unzip the archive and cd into the directory 
    * execute the commands `./configure`, `make`, and `sudo make install` (if something fails, look at the error description, you might be missing a dependency)

#### Tinkerforge software
    
The Tinkerforge framework is needed, especially the [C(++) bindings for the Tinkerforge sensors](https://www.tinkerforge.com/de/doc/Software/API_Bindings_C.html).
In order to fetch and build those:
* You can just execute `bash get_tinkerforge.sh` (hereby, the script assumes that the commands `wget` and `unzip` are available), which downloads and builds the bindings. 
* Alternatively, you can manually download them [here](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Downloads.html#downloads-bindings-examples) and extract them into a `tinkerforge` directory which needs to be at the same level as the `src` directory of the Theremin application. Inside the `tinkerforge/source` directory, execute the command `make` to compile the Tinkerforge bindings.

If you want to install the bindings globally, additionally execute `sudo make install` inside the `tinkerforge/source` directory. If you skip this, you might have to explicitly provide the library path when launching the application (see below).

Also, install the daemon [brickd](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Software/Brickd.html#brickd) which will enable communication between the computer and the brick, and the UI assistant [brickv](https://www.tinkerforge.com/en/doc/Software/Brickv.html#brickv) to initially fetch the UIDs of your sensors.

#### Sensor setup

Execute
```
sudo brickd --daemon
```
and open `brickv`. You should now be able to connect to your master brick and see the connected two distance sensors. Get their three-figure UIDs (for example, `uvw` and `xyz`) and replace the definitions of `UID_FREQUENCY` and `UID_VOLUME` inside the configuration file `theremin.cfg` with your UIDs.
```
/* Sensor settings */

// Insert 1st bricklet UID here [alphanumeric string of size 3]
uid_frequency = "uvw"; 
// Insert 2nd bricklet UID here [alphanumeric string of size 3]
uid_volume = "xyz";
```
(It does not matter which of the sensors is assigned to which constant, as you can just swap them.)

#### Compile and run

You can now compile the Theremin application by executing
```
bash build.sh
```
inside the application's root folder, which should let an executable called `theremin` appear.

Now, with `brickd` still running, you can execute the application (`./theremin`) and play Theremin! (If the program doesn't launch but instead complains about a missing library, start the program with the command `LD_LIBRARY_PATH=tinkerforge/source/:/usr/local/lib/ ./theremin`.) 

The USB foot switch should be plug-and-play; for correct input mapping, see the following section, subsection "Foot switch".

## Using and tweaking

To properly play the instrument, the sensors should be fastened and aligned. A 90 degree approach as shown in the blueprint works fine, with the frequency sensor pointing upwards and the volume sensor pointing to the side. Of course, the sensors can be built into a little box just like I have done (I could have taken a much smaller box if it wasn't for the long connection cables I bought).

Playing with pure hands is possible, but I experienced rather heavy noise and inaccuracies. To achieve really clear results, you can cut out two large circles of cupboard and glue some straps for your hands on it. The cupboard will reflect the ultrasonic waves very well.

### Foot switch

The foot switch has the following options:

* Left pedal: The current frequency will be stored and will continue to play until the pedal gets pressed another time. You can move your hand and play two tones at once.
* Central pedal: Until the pedal gets pressed another time, all tones will be played exactly one octave higher. This can be used to extend the pitch range of the instrument.
* Right pedal: Each press switches the waveform which is being used for audio synthesis. I implemented some pretty random waveforms, with varying results.

By default, the foot switch used by me just puts out the letters "a", "b" and "c" respectively, just like a keyboard. Hence, you can use the keys of your keyboard as well (which, however, is much less convenient than a foot switch). You can change the triggering characters for specific actions inside the configuration file `theremin.cfg` under the paragraph `Input settings`.

### Autotune modes

The application supports some types of frequency aligning: `none`, `smooth` and `full`. By default, you can change the type by pressing 1, 2 or 3 respectively, and they have the following effects:

* `none`: The distance value of the sensor gets directly mapped to a frequency (in an exponential manner, such that moving the hand by the same amount on different height levels should yield roughly the same frequency interval).
* `smooth`: Works like `none`, but adds a specific sine wave to the frequency such that the played tone gets "pushed" towards proper halftones, but in-between frequencies are possible nonetheless.
* `full`: Every input frequency (the output of the `none` mode) will be aligned towards the halftone which has the minimal distance to the current frequency. This will make the output tone "jump" in between halftones but always produce properly aligned tones.

### Configuration

If your computer can't handle the program without audibly cracking or if you aren't happy with some of the default settings, many things can be tweaked by editing the previously mentioned file `theremin.cfg`. To tune performance (and trade against better audio quality and/or lower latency), especially the real-time display can be turned off (`realtime_display`) or its refresh rate can be decreased (`task_frequency_display_refresh`). Additionally, the setting `sample_rate` as well as the other different task frequencies (`task_frequency_*`) can be adjusted, resulting in a better performance as well.

Just restart the application for the changes to take effect.
